Tutorial on uncertainty estimation (#399)
ivadomed/ivadomed: docs/source/tutorials/uncertainty.rst

Estimate uncertainty

> =====================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
====================
```

> This tutorial shows how to estimate uncertainty measures on the model predictions. Uncertainty measures that are
> implemented in ``ivadomed`` are detailed :doc:`../technical_features#uncertainty-measures`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to estimate uncertainty measures on the model predictions. The uncertainty measures implemented in ``ivadomed`` are detailed in :doc:`../technical_features#uncertainty-measures`.
```

.. _Prerequisite:

Prerequisite
------------

The spinal cord segmentation model generated from :doc:`../tutorials/one_class_segmentation_2d_unet` will be used to

> estimate uncertainty at inference time. Please make sure you did this tutorial prior to this present example and that a

Reviewer: isn't there a possibility to remove the tutorial dependency to be able to make this tutorial? e.g. using one of the model available in the test data?

Author: Great
Issue opened [here](https://github.com/ivadomed/ivadomed/issues/407).

> estimate uncertainty at inference time. Please make sure you did this tutorial prior to this present example and that a
> folder named ``seg_sc_t1-t2-t2s-mt`` is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
estimate uncertainty at inference time. Please make sure you finished tutorial :doc:`../tutorials/one_class_segmentation_2d_unet` before starting the current tutorial, and that a
folder named ``seg_sc_t1-t2-t2s-mt`` is available.
```

Configuration file
------------------

> The configuration file used in this tutorial is the one used for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration file used in this tutorial is the same as the one used for
```

:doc:`../tutorials/one_class_segmentation_2d_unet`. Please open it with a text editor. The parameters that are specific
to this tutorial are:

- ``command``: Action to perform. Here, we want to do some inference using the previously trained model, so we set the
field as follows:

  .. code-block:: xml

     "command": "test"

> - ``testing_parameters:uncertainty``: Parameters related to the uncertainty estimation. ``"epistemic"`` and
> ``"aleatoric"`` indicates whether the epistemic and the aleatoric uncertainty are estimated, respectively. Note that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``testing_parameters:uncertainty``: Type of uncertainty to choose between ``"epistemic"`` and
``"aleatoric"``. Note that
```

> - ``testing_parameters:uncertainty``: Parameters related to the uncertainty estimation. ``"epistemic"`` and
> ``"aleatoric"`` indicates whether the epistemic and the aleatoric uncertainty are estimated, respectively. Note that
> they can be estimated in combination (i.e. both set to ``true``). For more information about these, please read
> :doc:`../technical_features#uncertainty-measures`. ``"n_it"`` controls the number of Monte Carlo iterations that are
> performed to estimate the uncertainty, please set it to a non-zero positive integer for this tutorial (e.g. ``20``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``testing_parameters:uncertainty``: Type of uncertainty to estimate. Available choices are ``"epistemic"`` and ``"aleatoric"``. Note that both can be ``true``. More details on the implementation are available in 
:doc:`../technical_features#uncertainty-measures`. 
``"n_it"`` controls the number of Monte Carlo iterations that are
performed to estimate the uncertainty. Set it to a non-zero positive integer for this tutorial (e.g. ``20``).
```

  .. code-block:: xml

     "testing_parameters": {
          "uncertainty": {
               "epistemic": true,
               "aleatoric": true,
               "n_it": 20

>                }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           }
```

     }

- ``transformation``: Data-augmentation transformation. If you have selected the aleatoric uncertainty, the data
augmentation that will be performed is the same as the one performed for the training, unless you modify the parameters

> in the configuration file (see below). Please make sure ``"dataset_type": ["training"]`` is conserved. Note that only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the configuration file (see below). Please make sure ``"dataset_type": ["training"]`` is preserved. Note that only
```

transformations for which a ``undo_transform`` (i.e. inverse transformation) is available will be performed since these
inverse transformations are required to reconstruct the predicted volume.

  .. code-block:: xml

        "RandomAffine": {
            "degrees": 20,
            "scale": [0.1, 0.1],
            "translate": [0.1, 0.1],
            "applied_to": ["im", "gt"],
            "dataset_type": ["training"]
        }

Run uncertainty estimation
--------------------------

Once the configuration file has been modified, run the inference with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   ivadomed -c config.json

If aleatoric uncertainty was selected, then data augmentation operations will be performed at testing time, as indicated
in the terminal output (see below). Note that ``ElasticTransform`` has been desactivated because no ``undo_transform``
function is available for it.

.. code-block:: bash

>     Selected transformations for the ['testing'] dataset:

Reviewer 2: When using `"dataset_type": ["training"]`, The transforms RandomAffine and ElasticTransform don't print here (since it prints 'testing' transforms only).

Author: But you want them to be selected (at least RandomAffine) for the aleatoric. Or.. Am I missing something?

Author: Mmmm it has been lost in the git merge... Re established in this [commit](https://github.com/ivadomed/ivadomed/pull/399/commits/242104bc30f3f40b54e177080c2cf30cf4538148). Thanks for catchijng this.

No need to modify the config file dataset_type --> aleatoric True / False is enough to control this (ie no need to " in the tutorial we don't indicate to change to add testing dataset in the RandomAffine transform") --> indicated in the tutorial with "the data augmentation that will be performed is the same as the one performed for the training".

Aleatoric = True:
```
Selected transformations for the ['testing'] dataset:
	Resample: {'wspace': 0.75, 'hspace': 0.75, 'dspace': 1, 'preprocessing': True}
	CenterCrop: {'size': [128, 128], 'preprocessing': True}
	RandomAffine: {'degrees': 5, 'scale': [0.1, 0.1, 0.0], 'translate': [0.03, 0.03, 0.0], 'applied_to': ['im', 'gt']}
	ElasticTransform: {'alpha_range': [28.0, 30.0], 'sigma_range': [3.5, 4.5], 'p': 0.1, 'applied_to': ['im', 'gt']}
	NumpyToTensor: {}
	NormalizeInstance: {'applied_to': ['im']}
ElasticTransform transform not included since no undo_transform available for it.
```

Aleatoric = False:
```
Selected transformations for the ['testing'] dataset:
	Resample: {'wspace': 0.75, 'hspace': 0.75, 'dspace': 1, 'preprocessing': True}
	CenterCrop: {'size': [128, 128], 'preprocessing': True}
	NumpyToTensor: {}
	NormalizeInstance: {'applied_to': ['im']}
```

Hope it clearer now :-)

    Inference - Iteration 14: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:09<00:00,  1.84s/it]
    Inference - Iteration 15: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:09<00:00,  1.87s/it]
    Inference - Iteration 16: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:09<00:00,  1.81s/it]
    Inference - Iteration 17: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:09<00:00,  1.95s/it]
    Inference - Iteration 18: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:09<00:00,  1.82s/it]
    Inference - Iteration 19: 100%|██████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [00:08<00:00,  1.71s/it]

The Monte Carlo samples are then used to compute uncertainties measures for each image. The results are saved under
``pred_masks``.

.. code-block:: bash

    Uncertainty Computation: 100%|███████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 5/5 [01:31<00:00, 18.28s/it]

> Six files are generated during this process for each testing image:

Author: Even if already in technical features?

> Six files are generated during this process for each testing image:

Author: I agree: I push an image specific to this tutorial.
But with the example of the SC --> there is only one object.. So cv, iou, avgUnc are not really informative.. quite disapointing -> I would prefer ppl to focus on the voxel-wise unc for this example.

- ``*_soft.nii.gz``: Soft segmentation (i.e. values between 0 and 1) which is generated by averaging the Monte Carlo
samples.
- ``*_pred.nii.gz``: Binary segmentation obtained by thresholding ``*_soft.nii.gz`` with ``1 / (Number of Monte Carlo
iterations)``.
- ``*_unc-vox.nii.gz``: Voxel-wise measure of uncertainty derived from the entropy of the Monte Carlo samples. The
higher a given voxel value is, the more uncertain is the prediction for this voxel.
- ``*_unc-avgUnc.nii.gz``: Structuve-wise measure of uncertainty derived from the mean value of ``*_unc-vox.nii.gz``
within a given connected object (e.g. a lesion, grey matter).
- ``*_unc-cv.nii.gz``: Structuve-wise measure of uncertainty derived from the coefficient of variation of the volume
of a given connected object across the Monte Carlo samples. The higher a given voxel value is, the more uncertain is the
 prediction for this voxel.
- ``*_unc-iou.nii.gz``: Structuve-wise measure of uncertainty derived from the Intersection-over-Union of the
predictions of a given connected object across the Monte Carlo samples. The lower a given voxel value is, the more

> uncertain is the prediction for this voxel.

Author: I get what you mean! And that something a bit confusing I agree but.. By definition IoU has to be maximized with CV minimized: Here we are using XX as measure of uncertainty, so my way to put it is: the worst is XX, the more uncertain it is.

> uncertain is the prediction for this voxel.

Author: I would find it even more confusing to have unc_iou that needs to be minimised (by doing 1-iou) to match unc_cv behaviour...

> These files can further be used for post-processing to refine the segmentation.

Reviewer: > Another side note not directly related to your tutorial: When on the Technical Features page, we can't see the 2 new tutorials in the side bar. On the ivadomed.org website the issue doesn't seem to be there, so it might just be on my local build

i've added the branch build on RTD, and added the link in https://github.com/ivadomed/ivadomed/pull/399#issue-468759511

> These files can further be used for post-processing to refine the segmentation.

Author: @andreanne-lemay thanks. Attempt to fix links and bullet points [here](https://github.com/ivadomed/ivadomed/pull/399/commits/aefce8b272ebfb76803c4eefdcaa7592f7fe6e83) and [here](https://github.com/ivadomed/ivadomed/pull/399/commits/89fe8e03dc62573730d5c962c413805ca86d9781), respectively.
